# Notes on C++ Course Lecture 8: A Little Bit of Graphics and Build Systems

In this small excursion, we want to create a program which draws a two-dimensional circle filled with green color onto the screen.
Afterwards, we shall use the build system to automate the compilation process.

## SFML as Grahpics Library
First of all, we need to install a graphics library.
For this small example, the SFML library seems suitable.
Read the [official SFML documentation](https://www.sfml-dev.org/tutorials/2.5/start-linux.php) to get better insight on how to do this.

Drawing two-dimensional shapes, text, and similar objects on the screen is handled by the graphics card of a computer.
The graphics card is a component which posseses its own memory, also known as dynamic random-access memory (DRAM), and its own processing unit (GPU).
Typically, the information for a screen resides on the DRAM and has to be transferred by the GPU after running customizable programs, called shaders, adjusting the output.

**Debian/Ubuntu**

    sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install libsfml-dev

**Arch Linux**

    sudo pacman -S sfml

## Sample Project

After a succesful installation of SFML, let us now start with a new project.

    $ pwd
    /home/lyrahgames/projects/cpp-course
    $ ls
    01-hello  02-input  03-fibonacci  04-files  05-rational
    $ mkdir 06-graphics
    $ ls
    01-hello  02-input  03-fibonacci  04-files  05-rational  06-graphics
    $ cd 06-graphics
    $ pwd
    /home/lyrahgames/projects/cpp-course/06-graphics
    $ touch main.cpp
    $ ls
    main.cpp

## First Graphics

We take the code for our small example from the [official SFML documentation](https://www.sfml-dev.org/tutorials/2.5/start-linux.php).

```c++
#include <SFML/Graphics.hpp>

int main() {
  sf::RenderWindow window(sf::VideoMode(800, 450), "SFML works!");

  sf::CircleShape shape(100.f);
  shape.setOrigin(100, 100);
  shape.setPosition(400, 225);
  shape.setFillColor(sf::Color::Green);

  while (window.isOpen()) {
    sf::Event event;
    while (window.pollEvent(event)) {
      if (event.type == sf::Event::Closed) window.close();
    }

    window.clear();
    window.draw(shape);
    window.display();
  }
}
```

Compiling the project with `g++ -o graphics main.cpp` will result in a few linker errors.
That is because all the special structures and functions in `main.cpp` are at least declared somehow by including `SFML/Graphics.hpp` but not defined.
For this, we need to actually link the SFML libraries to our project.

## Library Linking

Again, this can be read [here](https://www.sfml-dev.org/tutorials/2.5/start-linux.php).

    $ g++ -o graphics main.cpp -lsfml-graphics -lsfml-window -lsfml-system
    ./graphics
    $ ./graphics

## Using the Build System

We do not want to remember all those libraries and the linker options.
Hence, we use a build system, like the build2 toolchain.
The build system allows us to script the compiling process and automatically append the difficult flags and options.

    $ pwd
    /home/lyrahgames/projects/cpp-course/06-graphics
    $ ls
    main.cpp
    $ touch buildfile
    $ ls
    main.cpp  buildfile

The `buildfile` is the file read by build2 to generate the executable.
For this small project, it looks like the following.

```
using cxx
import libs = sfml-graphics%lib{sfml-graphics}
exe{graphics}: cxx{main.cpp} $libs
```

Furthe explanations of the `buildfile` syntax are given in the next lessons.
We can start the compiling process by calling the following (very simple) command (at least it is only a single letter).

    $ b
    $ ./graphics

    $ b clean

## References

- [SFML](https://www.sfml-dev.org/)
- [build2](https://build2.org/build2/doc/build2-build-system-manual.xhtml)